Explains Traefik HTTP response status codes (#8170)
traefik/traefik: docs/content/getting-started/faq.md

# FAQ

## Why is Traefik Answering XXX HTTP Response Status Code ?

Traefik is a dynamic reverse proxy,

> and while the documentation often demonstrate configuration options through file examples,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and while the documentation often demonstrates configuration options through file examples,
```

the core feature of Traefik is its ability to be provided with configuration dynamically.

> The file provider allows to provide [dynamic configuration](../configuration-overview/#the-dynamic-configuration) through a file or directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The file provider allows providing [dynamic configuration](../configuration-overview/#the-dynamic-configuration) through a file or directory.
```

> It has to be distinguished from the [static configuration](../configuration-overview/#the-static-configuration),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is different from the [static configuration](../configuration-overview/#the-static-configuration),
```

> which can also be provided by a file.

Reviewer 2: Notably, a part of of the configuration is [static](../configuration-overview/#the-static-configuration), and can be provided by a file on startup, whereas various providers, such as the file provider, contribute dynamically all along the traefik instance lifetime to its [dynamic configuration](../configuration-overview/#the-dynamic-configuration) changes.

> that can also be provided by a file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which can also be provided by a file.
```

For HTTP configurations, the EntryPoint concept matches the Transport Layer (TCP),

> while the Router concept matches the Presentation (TLS) and Application layers (HTTP).

Reviewer 2: In addition, the configuration englobes concepts such as the EntryPoint which can be seen as a listener on the Transport Layer (TCP), as apposed to the Router which is more about the the Presentation (TLS) and Application layers (HTTP). And there can be as many routers as one wishes for a given EntryPoint.

> An EntryPoint is not tied to the protocol HTTP or HTTPS,
> as one can attach a TLS router or a non-TLS router to the same EntryPoint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In other words, for a given Entrypoint, at any given time the traffic seen is not bound to be just about one protocol. It could be HTTP, or otherwise. Over TLS, or not. Not to mention that dynamic configuration changes potentially make that kind of traffic vary over time.
```

> ***Therefore, in this dynamic context, when an EntryPoint is configured, 
> Traefik is handling traffic on the EP port without the guarantee to match any configured route.***

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
***Therefore, in this dynamic context, the static configuration of an EntryPoint does not give any hint whatsoever about how the traffic going through that EntryPoint is going to be routed. Or whether it's even going to be routed at all, i.e. whether there is a Router matching the kind of traffic (a request, or otherwise) going through it. ***
```

> Traefik is handling traffic on the EP port without the guaranty to match any configured route.***

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Traefik is handling traffic on the EP port without the guarantee to match any configured route.***
```

### 404 Not found

> Traefik returns 404 response code in the following situations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Traefik returns a 404 response code in the following situations:
```

- A request reaching an EntryPoint that has no Routers
- An HTTP request reaching an EntryPoint that has no HTTP Router
- An HTTPS request reaching an EntryPoint that has no HTTPS Router
- A request reaching an EntryPoint that has HTTP/HTTPS Routers that cannot be matched

> From Traefik point of view, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From Traefik's point of view, 
```

> every times a request cannot be matched with a router the response code is a 404 Not found.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
every time a request cannot be matched with a router the correct response code is a 404 Not found.
```

> A 503 Service Unavailable response code would not be adapted in this situation 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A 503 Service Unavailable response code would not be used in this situation 
```

> because Traefik is not able to state that the lack of a matching router for a request is only temporary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
because Traefik is not able to confirm that the lack of a matching router for a request is only temporary.
```

> Traefik routing configuration is dynamic and aggregated from different providers,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Traefik's routing configuration is dynamic and aggregated from different providers,
```

hence it's not possible to assume at any moment that a specific route should be handled or not.

> This behavior is consistent with the [rfc7231](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7231#section-6.6.4):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This behavior is consistent with [rfc7231](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7231#section-6.6.4):
```

> The server is currently unable to handle the request due to a
> temporary overloading or maintenance of the server. The implication
> is that this is a temporary condition which will be alleviated after
> some delay. If known, the length of the delay MAY be indicated in a
> Retry-After header. If no Retry-After is given, the client SHOULD
> handle the response as it would for a 500 response.
>
>      Note: The existence of the 503 status code does not imply that a
>      server must use it when becoming overloaded. Some servers may wish
>      to simply refuse the connection.

### 502 Bad Gateway

> Traefik returns 502 response code when an error happens while contacting the upstream service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Traefik returns a 502 response code when an error happens while contacting the upstream service.
```

### 503 Service Unavailable

> Traefik returns 503 response code when a Router has been matched 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Traefik returns a 503 response code when a Router has been matched 
```

> but then there is no server ready to handle the request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but there are no servers ready to handle the request.
```

> This situation is expected when a service has been explicitly configured without servers,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This situation is encountered when a service has been explicitly configured without servers,
```

or when a service has healthcheck enabled and all servers are unhealthy.

### XXX Instead Of 404

> Sometimes, the 404 response code doesn't play well with other parties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes, the 404 response code doesn't play well with other parties or services (such as CDNs).
```

> In that situation, one could want that Traefik always replies with a 503 response code,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In these situations, you may want Traefik to always reply with a 503 response code,
```

> in place of a 404 response code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instead of a 404 response code.
```

To achieve this behavior, a simple catchall router, 
with the lowest possible priority and routing to a service without servers,
can handle all the requests when no other router has been matched.

> The example below is only a file provider version (yaml) of the configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example below is a file provider only version (yaml) of what this configuration could look like:
```

Traefik is a dynamic reverse proxy,
and while the documentation often demonstrates configuration options through file examples,
the core feature of Traefik is its dynamic configurability,
directly reacting to changes from providers over time.

Notably, a part of the configuration is [static](../configuration-overview/#the-static-configuration),
and can be provided by a file on startup, whereas various providers,
such as the file provider,
contribute dynamically all along the traefik instance lifetime to its [dynamic configuration](../configuration-overview/#the-dynamic-configuration) changes.

In addition, the configuration englobes concepts such as the EntryPoint which can be seen as a listener on the Transport Layer (TCP),
as apposed to the Router which is more about the Presentation (TLS) and Application layers (HTTP).
And there can be as many routers as one wishes for a given EntryPoint.

In other words, for a given Entrypoint,
at any given time the traffic seen is not bound to be just about one protocol.
It could be HTTP, or otherwise. Over TLS, or not.
Not to mention that dynamic configuration changes potentially make that kind of traffic vary over time.

> !!! info "Note"
>     Therefore, in this dynamic context,
>     the static configuration of an `entryPoint` does not give any hint whatsoever about how the traffic going through that `entryPoint` is going to be routed.
>     Or whether it's even going to be routed at all,
>     i.e. whether there is a Router matching the kind of traffic going through it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore, in this dynamic context,
the static configuration of an `entryPoint` does not give any hint whatsoever about how the traffic going through that `entryPoint` is going to be routed.
Or whether it's even going to be routed at all,
i.e. whether there is a Router matching the kind of traffic going through it.
```

### `404 Not found`

Traefik returns a `404` response code in the following situations:

- A request reaching an EntryPoint that has no Routers
- An HTTP request reaching an EntryPoint that has no HTTP Router
- An HTTPS request reaching an EntryPoint that has no HTTPS Router
- A request reaching an EntryPoint that has HTTP/HTTPS Routers that cannot be matched

From Traefik's point of view, 
every time a request cannot be matched with a router the correct response code is a `404 Not found`.

> A `503 Service Unavailable` response code would not be used in this situation 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this situation, the response code is not a `503 Service Unavailable`
```

    is that this is a temporary condition which will be alleviated after
    some delay. If known, the length of the delay MAY be indicated in a
    Retry-After header. If no Retry-After is given, the client SHOULD
    handle the response as it would for a 500 response.
    
        Note: The existence of the 503 status code does not imply that a
        server must use it when becoming overloaded. Some servers may wish
        to simply refuse the connection.
    ```

    Extract from [rfc7231#section-6.6.4](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7231#section-6.6.4).

### `502 Bad Gateway`

Traefik returns a `502` response code when an error happens while contacting the upstream service.

### `503 Service Unavailable`

Traefik returns a `503` response code when a Router has been matched 
but there are no servers ready to handle the request.

This situation is encountered when a service has been explicitly configured without servers,
or when a service has healthcheck enabled and all servers are unhealthy.

### `XXX` Instead of `404`

Sometimes, the `404` response code doesn't play well with other parties or services (such as CDNs).

> In these situations, you may want Traefik to always reply with a 503 response code,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In these situations, you may want Traefik to always reply with a `503` response code,
```

instead of a `404` response code.

To achieve this behavior, a simple catchall router, 
with the lowest possible priority and routing to a service without servers,
can handle all the requests when no other router has been matched.

The example below is a file provider only version (`yaml`) of what this configuration could look like:

```yaml tab="Static configuration"
# traefik.yaml

entrypoints:
  web:
    address: :80

providers:
  file:
    filename: dynamic.yaml
```

```yaml tab="Dynamic configuration"
# dynamic.yaml

http:
  routers:
    catchall:
      # attached only to web entryPoint
      entryPoints:
        - "web"
      # catchall rule
      rule: "PathPrefix(`/`)"
      service: unavailable
      # lowest possible priority
      # evaluated when no other router is matched
      priority: 1

  services:
    # Service that will always answer a 503 Service Unavailable response
    unavailable:
      loadBalancer:
        servers: {}
```

!!! info "Dedicated service"

>     To gain control over the response code and message,
>     a custom service would be associated with the catchall router.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    If there is a need for a response code other than a `503` and/or a custom message,
    the principle of the above example above (a catchall router) still stands,
    but the `unavailable` service should be adapted to fit such a need.
```
